.TH BITGRAIN 1 "2026-04-05" "Bitgrain 1.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
bitgrain \- JPEG-like image compressor using the .bg format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bitgrain
.B encode
.RB [ \-\-quality
.IR 1-100 ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR output ]
.IR input
.PP
.B bitgrain
.B decode
.RB [ \-\-output\-quality
.IR 1-100 ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR output ]
.IR input.bg
.PP
.B bitgrain
.B roundtrip
.RB [ \-\-quality
.IR 1-100 ]
.RB [ \-\-output\-quality
.IR 1-100 ]
.RB [ \-\-metrics ]
.RB [ \-o
.IR output ]
.IR input
.PP
Use
.B \-
as
.I input
or
.I output
for stdin/stdout.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Bitgrain is a block-based image codec (JPEG-like) that encodes images into a custom
.BR .bg
stream and can decode
.BR .bg
back into pixels or standard image files.
It supports grayscale (1 channel), RGB (3 channels), and RGBA (4 channels).
.PP
The CLI operates in three modes via subcommands:
.RS
.IP "\fBencode\fR" 8
Compress an image (or directory of images) to
.BR .bg
format.
.IP "\fBdecode\fR" 8
Decompress a
.BR .bg
file (or directory) to an image.
.IP "\fBroundtrip\fR" 8
Encode + decode in memory (no
.BR .bg
file written). Useful for quality evaluation.
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Common options (all subcommands)
.TP
.BI \-o " " path
Output file or directory.
Use
.B \-
to write to stdout (raw PPM/PGM).
When multiple inputs are provided, the output must be a directory (default:
.BR out ).
.TP
.B \-\-overwrite, \-y
Overwrite existing output files.
Without this flag, Bitgrain avoids overwriting by choosing an alternative path.
.TP
.BI \-\-threads " " n ", " \-t " " n
Set worker thread count for codec internals (default: runtime-managed).
.TP
.B \-\-deterministic
Alias for
.BR \-\-threads " 1"
to force single-thread deterministic execution.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print subcommand help and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.SS encode options
.TP
.BI \-\-quality " " 1-100 ", " \-q " " 1-100
Quality for encoding into
.BR .bg
(default 85).
Higher values = less quantization = better quality, larger file.
.SS decode options
.TP
.BI \-\-output\-quality " " 1-100 ", " \-Q " " 1-100
Quality for writing JPEG/WebP output images (default 85).
Only applies when the chosen output format is lossy.
.SS roundtrip options
.TP
.BI \-\-quality " " 1-100 ", " \-q " " 1-100
Encode quality (default 85).
.TP
.BI \-\-output\-quality " " 1-100 ", " \-Q " " 1-100
Output JPEG/WebP quality (default 85).
.TP
.B \-\-metrics, \-m
Print PSNR and SSIM versus the original after processing.
.SH STDIN / STDOUT
Bitgrain supports UNIX pipes via
.B \-
as input or output:
.PP
.RS
.B cat photo.jpg | bitgrain encode \- \-o out.bg
.RE
.RS
.B bitgrain decode photo.bg \-o \- | display
.RE
.RS
.B cat photo.jpg | bitgrain encode \- \-o \- > out.bg
.RE
.PP
When writing to stdout, decoded images are emitted as raw PPM (RGB) or PGM (grayscale).
.SH INPUT AND OUTPUT
.SS Input formats
Input images are loaded via stb_image and libwebp.
Common supported formats include JPEG, PNG, BMP, GIF, TGA, PGM, PSD, HDR, and WebP.
.SS Output formats
When writing an image (decode/roundtrip), the output format is chosen by the extension
of
.BR \-o :
.BR .jpg / .jpeg ,
.BR .png ,
.BR .bmp ,
.BR .tga ,
.BR .pgm
(grayscale only),
and
.BR .webp .
.PP
When encoding, output is a
.BR .bg
file.
If
.BR \-o
is omitted for a single input, Bitgrain writes
.BR <input>.bg .
.SH MULTIPLE INPUTS
Pass a directory or multiple files as positional arguments:
.PP
.RS
.B bitgrain encode ./images \-o ./compressed \-\-quality 80
.RE
.RS
.B bitgrain decode ./compressed \-o ./images
.RE
.PP
If multiple inputs are provided, Bitgrain writes outputs into a directory.
If
.BR \-o
is omitted, it defaults to
.BR out .
.SH BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY
Legacy flag-based syntax is still supported:
.PP
.RS
.B bitgrain \-i input.png \-o output.bg
.RE
.RS
.B bitgrain \-d \-i input.bg \-o output.png
.RE
.RS
.B bitgrain \-cd \-i input.png \-o output.jpg
.RE
.SH FORMAT
The
.BR .bg
format is a block-based stream using 8\(mu8 DCT, quantization, and entropy coding.
Legacy versions use RLE; newer versions use Huffman coding with plane length prefixes.
The header is 12 bytes:
.RS
.IP "\(bu" 2
Magic "BG" (0x42 0x47)
.IP "\(bu" 2
Version: 1=grayscale (RLE), 2=RGB (RLE), 3=RGBA (RLE), 4=YCbCr420 (Huffman), 5=YCbCr420A (Huffman)
.IP "\(bu" 2
Width (uint32 little-endian)
.IP "\(bu" 2
Height (uint32 little-endian)
.IP "\(bu" 2
Quality (1\(en100; 0 means default)
.RE
.PP
See
.BR FORMAT.md
in the source tree for the full specification.
.SH EXAMPLES
Encode an image to
.BR .bg :
.PP
.RS
.B bitgrain encode input.png \-o output.bg
.RE
.PP
Encode with default output name:
.PP
.RS
.B bitgrain encode input.png
.RE
.PP
Decode a
.BR .bg
file into a PNG:
.PP
.RS
.B bitgrain decode input.bg \-o output.png
.RE
.PP
Round-trip and print metrics:
.PP
.RS
.B bitgrain roundtrip input.png \-o output.jpg \-\-quality 85 \-\-metrics
.RE
.PP
Batch encode a directory:
.PP
.RS
.B bitgrain encode ./images \-o ./compressed \-\-quality 80
.RE
.PP
Pipe encode:
.PP
.RS
.B cat input.jpg | bitgrain encode \- \-o output.bg
.RE
.PP
Pipe decode to display:
.PP
.RS
.B bitgrain decode input.bg \-o \- | display
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failure (invalid arguments, I/O error, encode/decode failure).
.SH AUTHOR
Iván Ezequiel Rodriguez.
.SH LICENSE
GPL\-3.0\-or\-later.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cwebp (1),
.BR djpeg (1),
.BR convert (1)
